one of the things that I love about
architecture is that there's always
somebody ready to take things to
completely the next level in terms of
radically sustainable design an
Earthship is a great example of that and
today we've traveled to Adelaide in
South Australia to visit the region's
very first council approved Earthship
[Music]
get anybody can I Bryce get to meet you
mate yeah you too welcome this place it
looks like something out of a science
fiction movie doesn't it it does a
little yeah now there's a lot of people
out there who I'm sure have never heard
of an Earthship before what is an
Earthship exactly
okay well an Earthship is a off-the-grid
building made out of natural and
recycled materials it's a bit like a
spaceship or a sailing boat there has to
be all self-sufficient doing everything
for itself with its power water and
sewage it's also called an Earthship
because it uses a lot of earth in its
construction earth being a very
sustainable construction material so
that's a good thing and also you have to
kind of sail the earth ship a little bit
thinking about you know when to open and
close windows and doors and vents to
make sure you've got a nice comfortable
indoor temperature the thing that
inspired this project was really the
work of Michael Reynolds who started
this earth ship thing back in the 70s
and 80s he was experimenting with this
stuff and one of his books was what got
me really thinking that perhaps we can
do something like this I always probably
a little skeptical that we had the
resources and the energy to pull it off
but yeah totally supportive of the idea
and I don't know at what point along the
way I fell in love with it but certainly
the end result he's worth it yeah now
what you've done here is really cool as
well because you've taken this earth
ship concept but you've kind of
downsized it haven't you yeah yeah well
it's actually based on one of Mike
Reynolds designs he calls it the simple
survival model earth ship and he
developed it in response to an
earthquake in Haiti so yeah I sort of
took my lead from that design and made a
few little changes just for our
Australian climate dealing with things
like bush fires and slightly more
extreme heat so it's just a little
demonstration Earthship to try and get
people excited and exposed to this idea
of earth ships so what size is this one
this one is about 70 square metres so
the main living space is about 25 the
greenhouse is about the same 25 and then
the bathrooms 10 and the entry is also
10 and so how did the earth ship itself
come about I went over to America to
visit Mike Reynolds and his earth ship
and I actually went and learned to build
I did their internship for a month then
I just really wanted to come back home
and start doing it so if you look on
this property you'll notice there are
little tire structures everywhere we've
got what we call the chalk ship up there
which is a little you know chuck house
made out of tires and I started a
rainwater tank that I never finished out
of tires and didn't take too long for me
to go now I want to actually do
something more substantial and one of
the real interesting things about this
project is that this is actually the
first council approved Earthship in
Australia there are a few projects
similar to this that went before but
they didn't go through the council
approval process and I wanted to really
show that you could get council approval
for something you know a building as
unusual as this you know using all these
strange construction materials and I
guess the other part of the story is it
became a bed-and-breakfast
because we already had our straw bale
house we weren't allowed to have a
second dwelling so instead of a dwelling
it's a bed-and-breakfast you scratched
on it before that one of the main things
about an Earthship is it being
completely off the grid and you can
really see that with this one a the top
of this home looks like a soldier ready
to go into battle it's totally loaded
with off-grid tech can you tell me a
little bit about all that well one of
the great things about the Earthship is
that it is so energy and water efficient
that you don't need too much tech
hopefully so there's only a one kilowatt
solar array on there and also there's a
solar hot water service and skylights
and things like that for ventilation and
yeah so there's a lot happening on that
roof absolutely and then on this side of
the roof it's really unique as well
because it looks like you've just kind
of got these banked Gardens going into a
gravel roof that's part of the Earthship
thing is that behind the building on the
south side you have this Bank of Earth
that's called an earth berm and what
that does is provide really good thermal
stability into the building because it's
sort of like it's you know almost like
an underground home and they're really
renowned for their I'm very nice stable
indoor temperatures but of course it's
also very bushfire resistance so the
gravel on the roof apart from it being a
wonderful filter for the rainwater that
we catch off it it's also non flammable
you know it's not burning a bushfire
absolutely so this gravel is actually
acting like a
so how does the rainwater collection
here work yeah you can see at the back
that's sort of like a box where all the
water that falls on that roof there's a
rubber sheet to waterproof the roof so
after the water passes through the
gravel it hits the rubber sheet and all
drains to a box and from that box it
gets split out to bury tanks means they
last longer the water is kept cool and
there's all sorts of benefits to putting
the tanks there one of the things that
completely enamors me with the whole
Earthship design though is aside from
all of the cool off-grid tech and all of
that stuff they're just beautiful aren't
they like everything that's on this one
with it's almost kind of elven
architecture and then you've got the
greenhouse at the front it just looks so
unique but gorgeous at the same time
yeah I agree with you on all those
things another thing I really love about
is the symmetry of it like when you're
looking from the front of it there's
this beautiful symmetry to it I'm not
sure but I suspect one of the intangible
things that makes people love the
Earthship is those curves like it's so
different to the usual sort of boxy
shapes that we're all familiar with so
yeah I think the curves are what do it
for people should we go and see if those
curves are continued on the inside let's
do that all right let's take a look come
on in Bryce thank you
this is the entry room and it's also a
little utility room so in here you've
got a battery bank about 14 kilowatt
hours of batteries so I think something
like the tesla powerwall was about 10
kilowatt hours so a little bit bigger
yeah and that's the old-school wet acid
battery type technology but it's all
very low maintenance in fact it's a zero
maintenance I've done nothing to it you
don't need to top it up with electrolyte
or anything like that the next room over
here is the greenhouse so you come and
check out the greenhouse oh now this is
seriously killer it's like having a
forest in your living room isn't it
it sure is yeah I feel like it's the
most beautiful part of the Earthship a
really unusual thing to have in a home
really to dedicate this much space
really to an indoor garden but it's a
really multifunctional space so it's
a really important part of how we
regulate the indoor temperature in the
living spaces back here it's also a
place where obviously you know there's
all this beauty but you can grow food in
here we harvested about 100 bananas off
one of these banana pumps here in winter
so I'm sure that was a world-first for
you know bananas up here in the Adelaide
Hills gets pretty cold here in the
winter so yeah it's this beautiful
indoor gardening space where you can
garden all year round
also another amazing part of this is
that it is a wastewater treatment system
so the idea is that whenever you have a
bath or shower you can harvest that grey
water by directing it into this garden
bed it's essentially a wicking bed with
a layer of gravel at the bottom that
fills up with your grey water and then
wicks up through the soil to the plants
roots another cool idea is that once the
water has passed through this garden bed
it's actually been cleaned up and he's
clean enough for toilet flushing so you
can have a pump at the end and use that
to flush the toilet I did have trouble
getting approval for that ultimately I
got told in the end that I was a very
naughty boy and I wasn't allowed to put
the grey water in here anymore okay if
you have a look down here under these
pot plants there's a little plumbing box
and this is the valve that I was told I
had to remove but essentially it enables
you just by turning the handle to direct
your great water into this garden bed or
you can direct your grey water out into
the septic tank which is of course the
normal thing that would happen and it's
a wonderful system that worked well for
a long time before I was told I had to
remove the valve yeah what a shame
though that the council wouldn't
actually let you do that because we just
drove through about three days of
drought stricken Australia to get here
where people are really trying to hang
onto water and then here they're just
like no waste it's got to go in the
septic it just seems so short-sighted to
me to not allow people to experiment
with clever utilization of grey water
yeah I couldn't agree more Bryce it was
really frustrating to be told no you're
not allowed to do this but yeah I hope
that one day
these laws will change because we we
kind of know it's not a health hazard
sometimes I really think bureaucracy is
just gonna kill us all
yeah oh great yeah that's right and I
mean I suppose the amazing thing about
this project is that that was the only
sticking point whereas there all these
other things like the tyre walls and you
know the bottle walls and things like
that so I guess I'm thankful in a way
that I didn't have more problems fair
enough - and talking about the bottle
walls they look stunning in here don't
they
yeah yeah I'm pretty pleased with the
bottle walls for such a tiny little
Earthship it's got a lot of bottle walls
they take a lot of effort to get looking
nice and I'm really grateful to all the
wonderful people who helped me build
this Earthship because some of them
showed real attention to detail really
put their heart and soul into it
now as much as I love the idea of
including a greenhouse within your home
does it just cook in here in the summer
well thanks for that question Bryce
because that's the question a lot of
people ask and the answer is not really
so typically what will happen is it can
be 40 plus degrees outside and
surprisingly in here it's cooler so
it'll probably be about 10 degrees
cooler than outside and I've kind of put
that down - the Sun just sort of
bouncing off these double glazed windows
at the front so that helps keep things
cool and also yeah just all the thermal
mass in the living space and the floors
out here that really helps to keep it
cool because it's all tapping into the
stable cool temperature of the earth
underneath the building and you being
completely equal to my level of
architectural geekiness you've actually
graphed and monitored all of that
haven't you yeah that's right yeah I
could show you some some graphs if you
want you'll notice throughout the
building little temperature sensors here
and there they're actually recording the
temperature every half an hour and I've
been monitoring the temperature now for
two or three years and what I'm finding
is it is you know a remarkably
energy-efficient building and also
there's another really interesting thing
I'd love to show you in a minute which
is the underground earth tubes that
actors like I'm a free
conditioning system I'd love to check
that out okay cool so where is that
hiding that's back in here okay okay so
this is kind of a little maintenance
hatch down to the earth tubes it's like
a little cellar so there are actually
two tubes down there they're about 250
mil in diameter and they're about a
meter deep although as they go down the
hill they get deeper down to about two
two and a half meters deep in a big
trench that we dug one day it was
actually a really warm day about 40
degrees and I measured the temperature
on the bottom of the trench and it was
13 degrees so that really shows the
stable and cool temperature of the
ground at that depth and that's what
these earth tubes are really tapping
into so as the air passes through them
it changes temperature to that stable
temperature of the earth so what I do is
I usually keep this closed and I use
this little cupboard here which has a
grill in the bottom this is where the
air comes through into the home so I can
close this off if I don't want too much
cross ventilation and there's also a
little sensor here which is showing at
the moment that the you know the air is
coming through at about 17 degrees it's
also got the air speed it's really
important that the air moves through
slowly if it comes through too quickly
it doesn't have time to change
temperature and so what I'm finding with
this it can be 40 degrees outside and
the air coming through here is 20
degrees so it's much much better than
opening up a window or something like
that and in the winter it warms the air
up so it really is just like having a
free air conditioner it's a free air
conditioner yeah that's so clever you're
gonna put some companies out of business
with that one
and then of course that has brought us
into the living space of the Earthship
nicely done and all sort of you know
just a very open plan room isn't it yeah
it's it's intended to be very
multifunctional so the bed here
that's a futon bed that can fold away to
a couch so I'm often Zoe comes down here
and does yoga with a few friends so we
can use it as a yoga space sometimes I
just set my laptop up here and you know
get work done here and yeah there's a
little kitchenette over there also this
cupboard that some regulating the air
flow for the earth tubes that's also
designed as a bench seat so that yeah
it's got a little bit of storage in it
as well and of course they see the
fireplace over there in the corner
lovely addition yeah yeah and also
that's multifunction as well because
apart from you know the heater provides
and the cooking function it's also
boosting hot water system so if the
solar hot water system is not providing
enough hot water you can light the fire
and within a couple of hours you'll have
lots of hot water standing in this room
it actually feels almost a bit like
being in a cave doesn't it this
beautiful
earthen floor and in the cool roof
design can you tell me how all this came
about yeah I think I mentioned before
that this was built with lots of
wonderful volunteers and could not have
done it without them
for example this roof structure it's
made out of lots of reinforcing bar you
know steel bar with sort of like a
chicken wire type mesh on it that you
use as a as a laughs to plaster a cement
mortar onto so yeah that was built over
to the side of the Earthship and then
lifted up by about 30 people who were
here volunteering to you know help build
this earth ship and when it was landed
on the top of the tyre walls here these
walls are made out of about 700 car
tires filled with compacted earth then
we poured a concrete beam on top of the
tires that really helps to lock that
roof structure onto the wall structure
makes it all super strong and then spent
a few days just plastering lots of
cement water onto that wire mesh
structure so that's what's giving us
this beautiful vaulted or
shape and it's been finished off
beautifully again by the volunteers with
a lime render and then whitewashed or
lime washed then you've got the
beautiful earthen render on the tyre
walls and then that meets the earthen
floors which is essentially the same
ingredients that are used to make the or
the other earthen wall renders it's just
sort of the clay that was from our site
and it's the same on the floor but the
floors a different color because we've
got a linseed oil finish so multiple
coats of linseed oil that soaks in and
makes it waterproof and not dusty feels
nice to your bare feet kind of thing and
then what is through that door over
there ah that's the bathroom you want to
go check that out let's check it out all
right so this is the bathroom Wow
and hear that bottle wall just jumps out
if he doesn't it it really does yeah and
at certain times of the day you know as
the sun's going down to the west there
really jumps out even more I bet now
this bath is beautiful is this on the
catalyst you quite right Bryce that is
Tallaght and again that was something
that some wonderful volunteers did there
was a couple of them who had experience
with tattle act and they thought the
elders how to do this
waterproof plaster is what it is and
it's an ancient Moroccan technique that
was used and yeah it's really really
beautiful and in the shower over here
and of course you've got another bottle
wall as a feature behind that yeah there
are bottoms just everywhere and was
probably a little bit ambitious to have
a bottle wall in a shower recess because
there's some waterproofing issues and
things there but I think I managed to
solve those problems you probably
wouldn't usually see a bottle wall and a
shower recess but I think yeah you can
see now some beautiful light coming
through that and yeah look it's it's
been quite serviceable when it's working
well you've got a washing machine as
well y and also a flushing toilet
yeah the flushing toilet probably
deserves some explanation because you'd
probably expect to see a composting
toilet you know
you know more ecological building but we
thought for the Earthship we'd stick
with that serveth shipowner
principle of trying to use the grey
water for flushing but as I said before
unfortunately local regulations don't
let us flush with great water so it's a
bit frustrating and what's through here
okay so this door we have a little
outdoor area so we go out a couple of
chairs and a table lovely space to stick
you out in the Adelaide news and what a
place just to take in the view and all
the wildlife I'm sure out here as well
there's some beautiful wildlife often
there's you know a little family of
kangaroos down there munching on the
grass and sometimes they're joined by
some cows and koalas and wedge-tailed
Eagles yeah we've got it all here and I
guess one of the other things that we
have to address is the cost because this
is such a unique project earth ships are
incredibly labor-intensive can you talk
to me about what this actually cost to
build it cost about a hundred and
seventy thousand Australian dollars to
build that doesn't include a lot of the
labor that the volunteers brought to the
projects we'd already built a straw bale
house a few years ago and I do remember
vividly halfway through that project
standing at the front thinking could we
sell this unfinished and so second time
around building the Earthship there were
points where it I think we both thought
this is too much it's too hard but we've
got there in the end and it's worth it
so yeah there was there were many times
we felt like God things are going too
slowly and you know this is too hard and
all that kind of thing but yeah you know
you just keep chipping away at it and
you get there in the end and
yeah it's been a good experience yeah
you learned that by persistency and you
can get there in the end
well I really love the finished result
of this home one of the things that just
jumps out to me is that it is completely
functional and packed with all this very
sort of clever building technology even
if a lot of its natural and innate
technology but the result is just as
beautiful as it is functional thank you
so much for sharing it with me Thank You
Bryce what I love about earthships goes
so much further beyond the cleverness of
all of the design and the technology
that goes into making it all possible it
really just comes down to the fact that
they're beautiful and ultimately
building beauty into our home is one of
the most important things that we can do
in a place that we live
[Music]
you